---
title: Mad World
---

On the occasion of my girlfriend's birthday, I decided to make a birthday song
of a different kind by covering
[the Wise Guys version of "Mad World"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0JFoVo0ahBI).
Extracting the five different voices in that song proved to be rather difficult.
If you are interested, I can pass you my recordings of the individual voices.
In any case, enjoy!

{% include audio.html media="mad_world.mp3" %}

Lyrics:

> All around me are familiar faces, worn out places, worn out faces.  
> Bright and early for the daily races, going nowhere, going nowhere.  
> And their tears are fillin’ up their glasses, no expression, no expression.  
> Hide my head I wanna drown my sorrow, no tomorrow, no tomorrow.  
>   
> And I find it kind of funny, I find it kind of sad.  
> The dreams in which I’m dying are the best I’ve ever had.  
> I find it hard to tell you, I find it hard to take.  
> When people run in circles it’s a very, very  
> Mad World, Mad World.  
>   
> Children waiting for the day they feel good. Happy Birthday, Happy Birthday.  
> Made to feel the way that every child should sit and listen sit and listen.  
> Went to school and I was very nervous, no one knew me, no one knew me.  
> Hello teacher tell me what’s my lesson, look right through me, look right through me.  
>   
> And I find it kind of funny, I find it kind of sad.  
> The dreams in which I’m dying are the best I’ve ever had.  
> I find it hard to tell you, I find it hard to take.  
> When people run in circles it’s a very, very  
> Mad World, Mad World, Mad World, Mad World.  
